# Sam Gower

###05/03/2019

##The world’s problems won’t be solved by inviting corporations to shape our degrees. 

Last week a group that hopes to bring us the UK’s first new university in forty years was launched. The London Interdisciplinary School, as it’s known, will offer only one degree. One that is designed to create “leaders who can think beyond the limits of traditional subjects, make new connections and find new solutions”. The idea is that students will start with a problem (e.g. knife crime) and then learn the variety of skills they need to solve it. It is hoped that graduates will leave with knowledge from a wide range of subjects, ready to tackle the world’s biggest issues straight out of university.

It all sounds great in theory but, after a few minutes on the website, it becomes clear that the central aim is to prepare students for jobs in companies that partner with the new university. The London Interdisciplinary School has asked firms like McKinsey and Virgin to help design their course so that graduates develop the skills that these employers are looking for. Again, this might not sound too bad- graduates want jobs after all. The danger with this approach though is that universities simply become glorified employee training and recruitment centres. Allowing corporations to outsource these processes while charging prospective employees £9000 a year for the chance to get a job with them. 

Allowing employers to shape our education system also comes with a bigger threat. The founders of the London Interdisciplinary School may like to imagine dynamic young graduates flying out of university ready to change the world. The more likely outcome, however, is that these companies will institutionalise students into their way of thinking – ensuring that graduates go on to recreate the system as it is rather than changing anything. University used to be about the joy of pursuing knowledge. Increasingly precarious living conditions, driven by a fall in secure and well-paid employment paired with the rising cost of housing, has created increasing pressure for universities to become jobs factories. Graduates are going to struggle to change this system that is so heavily stacked against them if all they have learnt is how to fall into the companies that are part of the problem. Students should be able to follow their passions and dream up new ways of living, not be forced to choose a degree which will best lead to employment. 

This isn’t the government’s position on higher education, unfortunately. Last month they relaunched the ‘University Enterprise Zones’ scheme which has made money available to ‘strengthen ties between universities and businesses’. A move that appears perfectly in line with its ‘socialism for the rich’ policy - using taxpayer money to prop up global corporations that contribute as little as possible to society. The Conservatives seem to have no issue with using state funds to help big companies outsource their training and recruitment to universities. 

It isn’t just the London Interdisciplinary School that hopes to foster links with businesses. It is a sector-wide practise that even affects a university’s ranking in league tables. The University of Manchester – which came out top in the UK for ‘business research income’ in the Times Higher Education Rankings – advertises to companies the opportunity for ‘nurturing talent’ at its institution. Most universities are increasing their corporate ties in an attempt to improve graduate employability. If it comes at the expense of academic freedom – as seems possible with this new university – it should be avoided at all costs.

Collaborating with industry can bring many benefits in terms of innovation. We should, however, be cautious of allowing the development of knowledge to be shaped too heavily by those with a vested interest in maintaining the status-quo. It appears that universities nor government can be trusted to avoid this situation. As students we must be aware of the dangers and continue to imagine futures that are radically different to the present.  


## Current levels of inequality cannot be justified while people are dying in the street. 

Early on Tuesday morning Ben was found dead. He had spent the night huddled in a tent in sub-zero conditions with only a few tins of food to survive. Ben was not an adventurer, he was one of the four thousand people forced to sleep on UK streets each night. These people are totally vulnerable and rely on the charity of others to survive. In the same city where nearly a quarter of the country’s homeless struggle to exist, billionaire Len Blavatnik - the UK’s richest man - lives in his £200m home. Just one of his many properties, it has an underground garage with car lift as well as an indoor/outdoor hybrid swimming pool and a cinema. His pastimes include hosting yacht parties too exclusive for Mick Jagger and paying for buildings to be named after him at places like Oxford University and the Tate Modern. People like Blavatnik hoard resources that would allow thousands of people to live a comfortable life. Instead of sharing their excess, the super rich live surrounded by luxury most of us couldn’t even imagine. When there are people with nothing, how can we allow some to live such superfluous lifestyles? When there are people in need, those that can afford to help must do so.

Some would say that the homeless are not deserving of help. They made bad choices, so the argument goes, and must deal with the consequences. This idea gains support because it makes it easier to ignore those in need. However, it wilfully forgets the plethora of reasons outside a person’s control that contribute to their condition. According to government data, the most common factors that lead to homelessness are insecure housing; a lack of parental support and relationship breakdown involving violence. Problems that could affect anyone of us given different circumstances. Demonising those in need is a convenient way of ensuring the privilege of the rich goes unchallenged. It also helps insure those responsible for the current conditions get away with it. It should not be a surprise that, while we allow homes to be traded for profit, people suffer. We need to stop blaming the poor for their situation and ask where the nation’s wealth is being kept. It's in the hands of a tiny number of elites. 

The ultra rich do not deserve their money. They were only able to get where they are through the stability and structure of society and must contribute fairly to it. Nobody needs the amount of money that the richest possess and it is irresponsible to allow the power it provides to rest with so few people. Lots of us work just as hard as the wealthiest in society and get comparatively nowhere. We should not overcompensate the rich for dumb luck regarding where they were born and the characteristics they have. These points are not important here, however. Neither is the fact that the typical defenses of inequality are wrong: the ‘trickle down effect’ is a myth and people are motivated by many things other than money. The real issue is that, in an age of austerity, there are billions of pounds being wasted on extravagant lifestyles for the rich. A Conservative government tells us that there is no ‘magic money tree’ to build houses or provide an adequate social safety net. At the same time they allow 1% of the population to hold 22% of our country’s wealth. The problem is not the amount that the wealthy have per se, but they cannot be allowed to accumulate endlessly while the rest of society suffers.

We are allowing a small minority of individuals to siphon off a vast amount of the country’s money. This inequality means that resources are not being efficiently used, that they are not benefiting the majority of people. The solution to this selfish behaviour must be to start aggressively taxing the wealthiest individuals and using the proceeds to invest properly in society. There is nothing ‘communist’ about this view. It does not propose an end to all inequality but there must be limits to what we allow. We cannot permit the rich to get endlessly richer while leaving people on the streets. In the 21st century it should be unthinkable that people are dying from poverty, especially in the world’s sixth largest economy. Ben’s life did not need to be lost. It was a result of decisions we have made as a society. In the future we must force those that can help people like Ben to do so. It’s not like they’re going to miss the money. 

## Jobs are shit, let the robots have them.

Your job sucks. Getting up in the dark sucks. Being undervalued sucks. What’s the point in toiling your whole life just for the promise of some future happiness? What even is it that’s going to make you happy? A big house? A fancy car? These Thatcherite aspirations and work ethic are just a way of keeping us enslaved to the capitalist class. What’s wrong with being lazy? Why should we have to spend the majority of our awake lives doing something that makes us miserable just to survive? There’s another way, we’ve been sold a lie. We don’t need an iPhone to be happy. Success isn’t having more stuff than your neighbour. There has been a conscious and determined effort to detach us from the things that bring us real joy. Community, leisure, fulfilment: these are the things that we should be pursuing. And we can have them right now if we want. 

We’ve reached a point where the essentials for a contented life are easy to provide. The problem is that the planet has been hijacked by a few hundred literal psychopaths. They have transmitted their ideology into every corner of the globe via a web of think tanks connected to a secret organisation called the Mont Pelerin Society. Over a number of decades, they have perpetuated this story that we are all selfish individuals and that the best way to organise society is to make us fight each other for resources. We have a system that rewards this behaviour and therefore forces people to act this way. There could, however, be a system that encourages the best of human nature to come forward. A society where everyone knows they have the support of their community and will never be without the means of survival. 

Our current measures of success are not sustainable. There is not enough space for everyone to have a private mansion with a tennis court and swimming pool. Violently competing for these things inevitably leaves the majority of people in the gutter and tears a hole through society that means everyone, including the rich, are worse off. You are left with a stratified existence that has no sense of togetherness, where people fear or resent their neighbours. To hold society in such extreme disequilibrium requires an effort that cannot be sustained. The police; a punitive welfare system; precarious work and housing conditions. All of these exist to maintain a level of inequality that would not otherwise be accepted. The endless pursuit of growth on a finite planet will eventually meet a catastrophic conclusion. When will they be happy? Those with more money than is fathomable still claw for more.   

Imagine a world where everyone had the security of a place to live which didn’t rely on them keeping their job to pay an extortionate rent or mortgage. Imagine if food and water, the most fundamental requirements for life, weren’t traded for profit but were supplied at basic levels for free? Imagine waking up in the morning knowing you had the freedom not to go to work without the consequence being your entire life crumbling around you. Neoliberalism isn’t freedom for most people. It’s freedom for the rich to exploit the planet and its population. We’re told we need free markets to protect us from malevolent governments but who is left to protect us when the most powerful entities are ravenous multinational corporations? We have what is necessary to live a long and happy life but it is withheld from us by powerful people that would rather have us generating profit for themselves. 

So when people bemoan losing their jobs to robots (or for any other reason) I’m somewhat bemused. What exactly is it they’re worried about losing? We’re perfectly capable of detaching those things from the less desirable act of working. If communities had control of the services they depended, they could live their lives with relatively few concerns. With more time to relax, spend time with loved ones and pursue hobbies, people would be happier and less anxious and would move away from endless consumption as a way of seeking fulfillment. We wouldn’t need so many superfluous products to ‘satisfy’ ourselves and thus working time would reduce again. Obviously there would still be jobs that needed doing but, because these would just be generating value for the community instead of creating excess for those further up the chain, there would be drastically more time for the finer things in life. Fuck profit. Fuck the economy. It’s time to start putting people first.
