## Current levels of inequality cannot be justified while people are dying in the street. 

Early on Tuesday morning Ben was found dead. He had spent the night huddled in a tent in sub-zero conditions with only a few tins of food to survive. Ben was not an adventurer, he was one of the four thousand people forced to sleep on UK streets each night. These people are totally vulnerable and rely on the charity of others to survive. In the same city where nearly a quarter of the country’s homeless struggle to exist, billionaire Len Blavatnik - the UK’s richest man - lives in his £200m home. Just one of his many properties, it has an underground garage with car lift as well as an indoor/outdoor hybrid swimming pool and a cinema. His pastimes include hosting yacht parties too exclusive for Mick Jagger and paying for buildings to be named after him at places like Oxford University and the Tate Modern. People like Blavatnik hoard resources that would allow thousands of people to live a comfortable life. Instead of sharing their excess, the super rich live surrounded by luxury most of us couldn’t even imagine. When there are people with nothing, how can we allow some to live such superfluous lifestyles? When there are people in need, those that can afford to help must do so.

Some would say that the homeless are not deserving of help. They made bad choices, so the argument goes, and must deal with the consequences. This idea gains support because it makes it easier to ignore those in need. However, it wilfully forgets the plethora of reasons outside a person’s control that contribute to their condition. According to government data, the most common factors that lead to homelessness are insecure housing; a lack of parental support and relationship breakdown involving violence. Problems that could affect anyone of us given different circumstances. Demonising those in need is a convenient way of ensuring the privilege of the rich goes unchallenged. It also helps insure those responsible for the current conditions get away with it. It should not be a surprise that, while we allow homes to be traded for profit, people suffer. We need to stop blaming the poor for their situation and ask where the nation’s wealth is being kept. It's in the hands of a tiny number of elites. 

The ultra rich do not deserve their money. They were only able to get where they are through the stability and structure of society and must contribute fairly to it. Nobody needs the amount of money that the richest possess and it is irresponsible to allow the power it provides to rest with so few people. Lots of us work just as hard as the wealthiest in society and get comparatively nowhere. We should not overcompensate the rich for dumb luck regarding where they were born and the characteristics they have. These points are not important here, however. Neither is the fact that the typical defenses of inequality are wrong: the ‘trickle down effect’ is a myth and people are motivated by many things other than money. The real issue is that, in an age of austerity, there are billions of pounds being wasted on extravagant lifestyles for the rich. A Conservative government tells us that there is no ‘magic money tree’ to build houses or provide an adequate social safety net. At the same time they allow 1% of the population to hold 22% of our country’s wealth. The problem is not the amount that the wealthy have per se, but they cannot be allowed to accumulate endlessly while the rest of society suffers.

We are allowing a small minority of individuals to siphon off a vast amount of the country’s money. This inequality means that resources are not being efficiently used, that they are not benefiting the majority of people. The solution to this selfish behaviour must be to start aggressively taxing the wealthiest individuals and using the proceeds to invest properly in society. There is nothing ‘communist’ about this view. It does not propose an end to all inequality but there must be limits to what we allow. We cannot permit the rich to get endlessly richer while leaving people on the streets. In the 21st century it should be unthinkable that people are dying from poverty, especially in the world’s sixth largest economy. Ben’s life did not need to be lost. It was a result of decisions we have made as a society. In the future we must force those that can help people like Ben to do so. It’s not like they’re going to miss the money. 




